---
title: OMSCS - Machine Learning For Trading
date: 2025-01-02 15:09:00 +0530
categories: [Georgia Tech, Review]
tags: [OMSCS]
author: Shounak Dey
---
As the semester of Spring 2025 draws to an open, I wanted to talk about my
first semester as a student of OMSCS. I took the generally accepted good
choice for a first course, which happened to be Maching Learning for Trading
(ML4T).

The primary instructors for this course is Dr. David Joyner. Although you will
see more of Steven Bryant in the live sessions as well as on EdStem, which is
the primary mode of communication with the rest of the cohort.

## Grading Distribution
- Projects - 71%
- Exams - 25%
- Quizzes - 2%
- Course Surveys - 2%

The grading is absolute in this course. No curve :( 

### Projects
The course had a project heavy structure. The eight projects over the semester
added up to 71% of the grade. This is also where you will learn the majority of the content. 

Each project had a different weightage on its
own, the lowest being 3%, and the highest being 20%. The highest weightage was
reserved for the final project which is worth it's weightage.

| Project              | Weightage | Report |
|----------------------|-----------|--------|
| Martingale           | 3%        | Yes    |
| Optimize Something   | 3%        | No     |
| Assess Learners      | 15%       | Yes    |
| Defeat Learners      | 5%        | No     |
| Market Simulation    | 8%        | No     |
| Indicator Evaluation | 7%        | Yes    |
| Q Learning Robot     | 10%       | No     |
| Strategy Evaluation  | 20%       | Yes    |

Most of the projects are similar to what is listed on the [Lucy Labs]([https://lucylabs.gatech.edu/ml4t/fall2023/])
page from Fall 2023. 
Assess Learners and Strategy Evaluation were the hardest projects of all. Make sure
that you start them on time. Both these projects needed at least 90-100 hours worth
of effort.
For Strategy Evaluation, I would strongly suggest being prudent about your approach on the trader.
You will have the option to use Random Forests and Q-Learner as well. I struggled with Q-Learner for
a full week, before I gave up and wrote the Random Forest solution. By the time you reach this project,
you should have learned how to manage your time.

Indicator Evaluation needed a lot of research to understand the indicators and making sure
we picked the correct one. This project was less of implementation but a lot more of understanding
technical indicators. This is an important project because these are what you will use for your
final project as well. 

Q Learning and Assess Learners were the only two projects that had core Machine Learning concepts.
Assess Learners dealt with Decision Trees and Random Forests. It also explored the Ensemble Learner concept
where we had to implement Bagging to reduce the variability in performance. The Q-Learning project had us
implement a Q-Learner from scratch that should be able to navigate through a world riddled with obstacles.
I really like the Q-Learner project as it was a new concept to me, and it was fun to implement it from scratch.

The rest of the projects were pretty easy. Each would take about 15-20 hours of your time at worst.
All projects have a very descriptive project instruction page. Make sure to read that thoroughly and
also consult on the EdStem page to see if there are any other things to be considered. They are very
descriptive of what each component of the project will account for in your final score. 

Note: Some of the projects did have extra credit for excellent work or report, although I never received it. 
Some people did. Wonder what they did... 

### Exams
Each exam is worth about 12.5% of your grade. In my opinion, be ready to lose some points in the exams.
Typically, they are multiple select questions, where each option is a T/F question. There is nothing to 
prepare specifically for your exams. Make sure that you go through the reading materials and understand it.
Although it is open book, treat it as an option to confirm your choices, rather than finding the choices.
You won't have enough time to read the question, go through the book and then come up with the answers.
You are allowed to use Chat-GPT, but I did not find it useful. 

### Quizzes and Surveys
Quizzes are worth 2% of your grade. No need to sweat it. But it is also the easiest 2% of your grade after
course surveys. It would be a set of simple questions to answer every week, usually based on the readings
assigned. 

There are four surveys that ask you about your experience of the course at each checkpoint of the course
timeline. These account to about 2% of your grade overall. 

## Review
Overall, I think this course had very little to do with Machine Learning as a concept. You learn very basic
algorithms that are almost never applicable in the real world. This course primarily deals with working on
financial data, implementing simple algorithms to model this data and an attempt at making a functional
automated trader.

The course content is very stale, as the lectures are almost 7 years old now. They use the lectures recorded by 
Professor Tucker Balch, who was a previous lecturer
of this course. I think he did a good job at explaining most of the concepts. As I mentioned before, most of your
learning will happen while working on the projects. The EdStem conversations are also extremely helpful. 
A lot of other students will be facing the same issues as you, so you will mostly find answers you are looking
for.  

But, all said and done, I think this is a decent course to start your OMSCS journey. The grading is very
forgiving. I lost about 4.5 points in exams and quizzes combined, netting me an A in the course. The most 
important learning outcome I had from this course, was the skill of writing a paper. When you implement something
for a better part of two weeks, you might have a book to write on the details. But, we had to limit these to about
10 pages typically, which is a lot harder than it sounds. 

Good Luck! :) 
